>> Woodruff: IN ANOTHER HIGH
PROFILE CASE OF A POLICE OFFICER
KILLING AN UNARMED BLACK MAN, NO
INDICTMENT FOR THE NEW YORK CITY
COP WHO KILLED ERIC GARNER IN A
CHOKE HOLD.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS WEDNESDAY, THE
MANUFACTURER OF FAULTY AIRBAGS
WITH DEADLY DEFECTS REFUSES
GOVERNMENT DEMANDS TO EXPAND
RECALLS.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, DO PREGNANT
WORKERS FACE UNFAIR
DISCRIMINATION?
THE SUPREME COURT WEIGHS WHETHER
EMPLOYERS MUST PROVIDE SPECIAL
CONSIDERATIONS TO EXPECTING
MOTHERS.
>> Ifill: AND NASA PREPARES TO
TAKE THE NEXT STEP TOWARDS
SENDING HUMANS TO MARS.
BUT A SUCCESSFUL JOURNEY TO THE
RED PLANET WILL TAKE TIME, MONEY
AND POLITICAL WILL.
>> WE'VE EITHER GOT TO AUGMENT
THE RESOURCES TO MAKE THE GOAL
ACHIEVABLE, OR WE'VE GOT TO
ADJUST THE GOAL TO BE SOMETHING
THAT'S CONSISTENT WITH THE
AVAILABLE RESOURCES, BECAUSE IF
WE DON'T, WE'RE GOING TO WASTE A
LOT OF MONEY.
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE SOME OF THE
STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: A WHITE POLICEMAN
IN NEW YORK CITY WILL NOT BE
CHARGED IN THE CHOKING DEATH OF
A BLACK MAN THAT WAS CAUGHT ON
VIDEOTAPE.
THE CASE HAS BEEN CLOSELY
WATCHED IN THE WAKE OF EVENTS IN
FERGUSON, MISSOURI.
POLICE ON STATEN ISLAND TRIED TO
ARREST ERIC GARNER FOR ALLEGEDLY
SELLING UNTAXED CIGARETTES LAST
JULY.
HE TOLD THEM TO LEAVE HIM ALONE,
BUT ONE WRAPPED AN ARM AROUND
HIS NECK AS GARNER REPEATEDLY
GASPED, "I CAN'T BREATHE."
IT TURNED OUT HE HAD ASTHMA, AND
HE DIED LATER.
THE OFFICER DENIED USING A
BANNED CHOKEHOLD, AND A GRAND
JURY TODAY FOUND NO REASONABLE
CAUSE TO INDICT.
THAT DREW OUTRAGE FROM SEVERAL
OF NEW YORK'S MEMBERS OF
CONGRESS, INCLUDING
REPRESENTATIVE HAKEEM JEFFRIES.
>> Woodruff: GARNER'S FATHER
CONDEMNED THE GRAND JURY
DECISION, CALLING IT, "A LICENSE
TO KILL A BLACK MAN".
BUT HE ALSO CALLED FOR CALM,
AS DID NEW YORK CITY MAYOR BILL
DE BLASIO, WHO URGED NON-VIOLENT
PROTEST.
>> IT IS NEVER MY INTENTION TO
HARM ANYONE AND I FEEL VERY BAD
ABOUT THE DEATH OF MR. GARNER.
>> Woodruff: AND IN WASHINGTON,
PRESIDENT OBAMA SAID THE CASE
UNDERSCORES AGAIN, "THE LARGER
ISSUES" THAT MINORITIES HAVE
WITH POLICE IN AMERICA.
>> WE ARE NOT GOING TO LET UP
UNTIL WE SEE A STRENGTHENING OF
THE TRUST, AND A STRENGTHENING
OF THE ACCOUNTABILITY THAT
EXISTS BETWEEN OUR COMMUNITIES
AND OUR LAW ENFORCEMENT.
>> Woodruff: A FUNERAL WAS
HELD FOR A 12-YEAR-OLD BOY
KILLED BY POLICE WHEN HE PULLED
A PELLET GUN LAST MONTH.
THE CHILD WAS BLACK, THE OFFICER
WHITE.
THE "CLEVELAND PLAIN DEALER"
TODAY REPORTED THE OFFICER'S
HANDLING OF FIREARMS WAS RATED
AS "DISMAL" IN A PREVIOUS POLICE
JOB.
>> Ifill: WORLD ALLIES GATHERED
IN BRUSSELS TODAY TO PLOT
STRATEGY AGAINST ISLAMIC STATE
EXTREMISTS.
DIPLOMATS FROM MORE THAN 60
NATIONS AND ORGANIZATIONS MET AT
NATO HEADQUARTERS.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
SAID AIR ATTACKS HAVE ALREADY
DONE SERIOUS DAMAGE TO ISLAMIC
STATE FIGHTERS.
>> WE ARE UNITED AND MOVING
AHEAD ON ALL FRONTS AND THAT WE
WILL ENGAGE IN THIS CAMPAIGN FOR
AS LONG AS IT TAKES TO PREVAIL.
AND THERE IS A REASON WHY WE ARE
CONFIDENT THAT WE WILL, AND THAT
IS ALL OF YOU AROUND THIS TABLE,
THE MEMBERS OF THIS COALITION.
>> Ifill: KERRY DECLINED TO
COMMENT OR DENY REPORTS THAT
IRAN IS ALSO CARRYING OUT AIR
STRIKES AGAINST ISLAMIC STATE
FORCES INSIDE IRAQ.
>> Woodruff: IRAN ISSUED ITS OWN
DENIAL TODAY OF THOSE AIR STRIKE
REPORTS.
UNNAMED PENTAGON OFFICIALS HAD
SAID IRAN USED AGING F-4 PHANTOM
JETS TO LAUNCH THE RAIDS IN
RECENT DAYS.
BUT IN TEHRAN, A GOVERNMENT
SPOKESMAN SAID IRAN'S SUPPORT
FOR IRAQ HAS NOT EXPANDED TO
INCLUDE DIRECT MILITARY
INTERVENTION.
>> ( translated ): THERE HAS
BEEN NO CHANGE.
THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF IRAN
CONTINUES TO PROVIDE ASSISTANCE,
ESPECIALLY ADVICE AND
CONSULTATION ASSISTANCE WITHIN
THE FRAMEWORKS OF INTERNATIONAL
LAW, BUT THERE HAS BEEN NO
CHANGE IN THIS REGARD.
>> Woodruff: AND IN SYRIA,
PRESIDENT BASHAR ASSAD SAID
TODAY THAT AIR STRIKES AGAINST
ISLAMIC STATE TARGETS IN HIS
COUNTRY HAVE DONE NO GOOD.
HE TOLD A FRENCH MAGAZINE THAT
ONLY GROUND TROOPS CAN DEFEAT
THE MILITANTS.
>> Ifill: MEANWHILE IN BAGHDAD,
THE IRAQI INTERIOR MINISTRY SAID
A WOMAN DETAINED IN LEBANON IS
NOT THE WIFE OF THE ISLAMIC
STATE LEADER, ABU BAKR AL-
BAGHDADI, AFTER ALL.
INSTEAD, A MINISTRY OFFICIAL
SAID SHE IS THE SISTER OF A MAN
CONVICTED OF BOMBINGS IN
SOUTHERN IRAQ.
>> Woodruff: THREE LEADERS OF
HONG KONG'S PRO-DEMOCRACY
CAMPAIGN SURRENDERED TO POLICE
TODAY, AFTER MORE THAN TWO
MONTHS OF DEMONSTRATING FOR FREE
ELECTIONS.
THE MEN WERE NOT IMMEDIATELY
CHARGED, AND WERE NOT DETAINED.
AFTERWARD, THEY AGAIN URGED
STUDENTS TO CALL OFF PROTESTS
THAT HAVE LED TO VIOLENT CLASHES
WITH POLICE.
>> ( translated ): THE SITUATION
IS VERY DANGEROUS SO I HOPE
PROTESTERS CAN END THE
OCCUPATION MOVEMENT AS SOON AS
POSSIBLE.
LET'S SAVE THE ENERGY AND
CONTINUE THIS PATH OF DEMOCRACY.
THIS IS A LONG AND EXHAUSTING
ROAD, BUT WE NEED TO WALK
TOGETHER.
>> Woodruff: DESPITE THAT
APPEAL, HUNDREDS OF STUDENT
DEMONSTRATORS REMAINED AT TWO
PROTEST CAMPS IN HONG KONG'S
FINANCIAL HUB.
>> Ifill: BACK IN THIS COUNTRY,
DROUGHT-RAVAGED CALIFORNIA
SOAKED UP A SECOND DAY OF HEAVY
RAINFALL FROM A MAJOR PACIFIC
STORM.
MORE THAN EIGHT INCHES HAD
FALLEN IN PARTS OF THE SAN
BERNARDINO MOUNTAINS BY DAWN.
TO THE NORTH, THE DOWNPOURS
SPAWNED ISOLATED FLOODING IN THE
SAN FRANCISCO REGION, WHERE SOME
ROADS WERE UNDER WATER.
FORECASTERS SAID THEY EXPECT THE
RAIN TO LAST THROUGH TOMORROW.
EVEN SO, IT'S EXPECTED TO TAKE
MANY MORE STORMS TO BREAK THE
DROUGHT.
>> Woodruff: THE REPUBLICAN-
CONTROLLED HOUSE MOVED TO EXTEND
$45 BILLION IN TAX BREAKS
THROUGH THE END OF THIS YEAR.
THE MOVE WILL ALLOW MILLIONS OF
BUSINESSES AND INDIVIDUALS TO
CLAIM THE BREAKS WHEN THEY FILE
THEIR RETURNS THIS COMING TAX
SEASON.
>> Ifill: THE HOUSE ALSO
APPROVED THE FIRST NEW
LEGISLATION ON DISABLED
AMERICANS IN NEARLY 25 YEARS.
THE SO-CALLED ABLE ACT FOR
ACHIEVING A BETTER LIFE
EXPERIENCE, WILL LET THE
DISABLED OPEN TAX-SHELTERED BANK
ACCOUNTS TO PAY FOR LONG-TERM
EXPENSES.
IT COULD AFFECT AS MANY AS 54
MILLION PEOPLE.
THE SENATE IS EXPECTED TO PASS
THE BILL AS WELL.
>> Woodruff: TEXAS AND 16 OTHER
STATES FILED SUIT TODAY OVER
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S EXECUTIVE
ACTIONS ON IMMIGRATION.
THEY WENT TO FEDERAL COURT IN
TEXAS, ARGUING THE PRESIDENT
EXCEEDED HIS POWERS BY
PROTECTING UP TO FIVE MILLION
MIGRANTS FROM DEPORTATION.
THEY ALSO CLAIM HIS ACTIONS WILL
FORCE THE STATES TO SPEND MORE
ON LAW ENFORCEMENT, HEALTH CARE,
AND EDUCATION.
>> Ifill: STOCKS RALLIED ON WALL
STREET TODAY.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 33 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
17,912; THE NASDAQ ROSE 18
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 4,774; AND
THE S&P ADDED MORE THAN SEVEN
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 2,074.
>> Woodruff: STILL TO COME ON
THE NEWSHOUR.
DETAILS OF THE ERIC GARNER
CHOKEHOLD CASE.
CONGRESS CONFRONTS AIRBAG
MANUFACTURER TAKATA OVER DEADLY
DEFECTS AND RECALLS.
THE SUPREME COURT WEIGHS
ARGUMENTS ON JOB PROTECTIONS FOR
PREGNANT WORKERS.
NASA'S FIRST STEP TO SEND HUMANS
TO MARS.
AND, INTERIOR SECRETARY SALLY
JEWELL ON PLANS TO RESTRUCTURE
SCHOOLS FOR NATIVE AMERICAN
STUDENTS.
>> Ifill: IN TWO CASES, IN TWO
CITIES, IN LESS THAN TWO WEEKS,
TWO GRAND JURIES DECLINED TO
INDICT WHITE POLICE OFFICERS
ACCUSED OF KILLING UNARMED BLACK
MEN.
BUT IN TODAY'S CASE, IN NEW
YORK, IT WAS ON TAPE.
HARI SREENIVASAN HAS MORE ON THE
CASE OF ERIC GARNER.
>> Sreenivasan: REACTION TO THE
GRAND JURY DECISION HAS BEEN
SHARP AND HIGHLIGHTS A VERY
TENSE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
POLICE IN NEW YORK AND THE
COMMUNITIES THEY SERVE.
IT'S ALSO A TEST FOR ITS NEW
MAYOR.
JOINING US NOW IS PERVAIZ
SHALLWANI, CRIMINAL JUSTICE
REPORTER FOR THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL."
SO SURPRISED?
>> YOU KNOW, I THINK THERE IS
SOME SURPRISE.
I THINK SOME PEOPLE BELIEVE THAT
BECAUSE THERE WAS A VIDEO IN
THIS CASE THERE WAS A LITTLE BIT
MORE CLEAR-CUT PATH TO A CHARGE
OF SOME KIND.
YOU KNOW, THE GRAND JURY
ULTIMATELY DECIDED THAT THERE
WASN'T.
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY.
THE PARALLELS AND THE NOT SO
PARALLELS WITH FERGUSON?
>> I THINK SOME OF THE PARALLELS
ARE THERE IS A BELIEF THAT IT'S
ALMOST IMPOSSIBLE TO INDICT A
POLICE OFFICER IN A CASE WHERE
THE AUTOPSY REVEALS THERE'S A
HOMICIDE, BUT THERE ARE VERY
DIFFERENT SITUATIONS HERE, JUST,
YOU KNOW, IN HOW THEY SORT OF
PLAYED OUT, ONE, AND, TWO, ON
THE GROUND THE WAY THE SITUATION
IS, I THINK NEW YORK CITY IS A
MUCH DIFFERENT SITUATION THAN
FERGUSON.
>> Sreenivasan: WE PLAYED A
LITTLE BIT OF THE VIDEO.
I THINK MOST OF THE COUNTRY IS
WONDERING, WAIT, EVERYONE CAN
SEE THAT SOMETHING HORRIBLE
HAPPENED TO THIS MAN, THAT THERE
WAS A CHOKEHOLD APPLIED.
THE NEW YORK CITY POLICE
DEPARTMENT CAME OUT AND SAID,
THIS IS NOT A MANEUVER THAT WE
AUTHORIZE.
THE CORONER AND THE MEDICAL
EXAMINER SAID THIS IS HOMICIDE
BY CHOKING.
YET STILL THE GRAND JURY
COULDN'T COME UP WITH IT.
>> THEY SAID IT WAS IN PART A
HOMICIDE BY CHOKING, BUT, YOU
KNOW, WHAT THE MEDICAL EXAMINER
DETERMINED AND HOW A CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATION UNFOLDS IS VERY
DIFFERENT.
YOU KNOW, CHOKEHOLDS ARE BANNED
BY USE BY THE N.Y.P.D., BUT THE
UNIONS AND THE OFFICE VERY
MAINTAINED THAT IT'S A MANEUVER
THEY WERE TAUGHT AT THE ACADEMY
AND HE WAS USING THAT MANEUVER
AND NOT INTENDED TO BE A
CHOKEHOLD AT ALL.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS EVENING
WE HEARD THE MAYOR SAY THIS IS
JUST ONE CHAPTER THAT'S CLOSED.
THIS IS SOMETHING NEW YORK CITY
AND THE POLICE DEPARTMENT HAS
BEEN PREPARING FOR.
>> N.Y.P.D. HAS BEEN PREPARING
FOR THIS FOR WEEKS.
THE POLICE COMMISSIONER LAST
WEEK AFTER THE FERGUSON RIOTS
SENT DOWN A COUPLE OF HIS OWN
DETECTIVES TO LEARN
ON-THE-GROUND TECHNIQUES AND GET
ON-THE-GROUND INFORMATION FOR
HOW NEW YORK CITY COULD PROCEED,
YOU KNOW, WHEN ERIC GARNER'S
DECISION CAME DOWN.
YOU STILL HAVE TWO OTHER PENDING
INVESTIGATIONS.
YOU HAVE AN INTERNAL AFFAIRS
INVESTIGATION THAT WILL
DETERMINE IF OFFICER PANTALEO
WAS ACTUALLY IN VIOLATION OF
N.Y.P.D. PROTOCOL.
YOU ALSO HAVE THE DEPARTMENT OF
JUSTICE ANNOUNCING THAT THEY'RE
OPENING A CIVIL RIGHTS
INVESTIGATION TODAY INTO THE
ERIC GARNER MATTER.
>> OKAY.
SO WHEN THESE INVESTIGATIONS
HAPPEN, IS THAT GOING TO CHANGE
THE FEELING OF THE COPS ON THE
STREET, THE ONES THAT YOU TALK
TO AS YOU DO YOUR REPORTING?
RIGHT NOW WHAT'S THE POSITION
THAT THEY'RE IN?
>> IT'S GOING TO DEPEND ON HOW
THINGS SORT OF UNFOLD I THINK
OVER NEXT COUPLE DAYS.
I MEAN, THERE IS SOME
APPREHENSION ON THE PART OF THE
COPS, WHAT YOU HEAR FROM SOME OF
THE UNIONS OUT THERE, BUT AT THE
SAME TIME, YOU HEAR THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT SAY THAT THE COPS ARE
GOING TO, YOU KNOW, GO THROUGH
SOME RETRAINING, AND UM MATTLY
THEY EXPECT OFFICERS TO DO THEIR
JOB.
>> Sreenivasan: AND WHAT KINDS
OF RETRAINING HAS THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT CONSIDERED IN THE
WAKE OF THIS AND IN THE WAKE OF
THE FERGUSON CASE, WHICH WHILE
IT'S DIFFERENT IS COMING WITHIN
A WEEK OF THIS.
>> SURE.
THE N.Y.P.D. ANNOUNCED ABOUT A
WEEK AFTER THE ERIC GARNER
INCIDENT, LESS THAN A WEEK AFTER
THE ERIC GARNER INCIDENT, THAT
IT WOULD RETRAIN ALL 35,000
OFFICERS.
THAT RETRAINING HAS ALREADY
BEGUN, PARTICULARLY THIS WEEK.
IT WILL FOCUS ON THINGS LIKE USE
OF FORCE, USE OF LANGUAGE AND
RETRAINING OF SOME OF THESE
TECHNIQUES THAT ARE USED IN THE
FIELD.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT THE
CHANGE THAT THE NEW YORK POLICE
DEPARTMENT WENT THROUGH IN THE
BEGINNING AS THE GARNER
INCIDENT, THEY SAID SOMEONE DIED
IN CUSTODY.
AFTER THE VIDEO CAME OUT, IT WAS
A DIFFERENT NARRATIVE
ALTOGETHER?
>> I THINK TO LISTEN TO THE
N.Y.P.D., THEY SAID THEY DIDN'T
REALIZE THAT THERE WAS A VIDEO.
ONCE THEY REALIZED THERE WAS A
VIDEO, THAT VIDEO WAS REVIEWED.
I THINK THEY CAME OUT AND GAVE
WHAT THEIR BELIEF WAS HOW THE
INVESTIGATION WOULD THEN MOVE
FORWARD OUT OF THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: THE PROSECUTOR
ALSO SAID TODAY, ALMOST SETTING
THE TONE, DON'T EXPECT ALL OF
THE EVIDENCE TO BE MADE PUBLIC
AS IT WAS IN THE FERGUSON
MATTER.
>> CORRECT.
>> Sreenivasan: WE DON'T
REALLY KNOW WHETHER HE TRIED TO
GO AFTER A LESSER CHARGE OF SAY
MANSLAUGHTER.
>> RIGHT.
I MEAN, IT'S NOT 100% CLEAR WHAT
CHARGES WERE PRESENTED TO THE
GRAND JURY.
THE STATEN ISLAND DISTRICT
ATTORNEY HAS COME OUT AND SAID
THAT, YOU KNOW, THE LAWS IN NEW
YORK ARE DIFFERENT THAN THE LAWS
IN MISSOURI.
AND SO HE IS BOUND WE NEW YORK
LAWS AND MUST GO TO A JUDGE TO
RELEASE SOME INFORMATION, AND
IT'S UNCLEAR WHAT KIND OF
INFORMATION HE IS SEEKING TO
RELEASE.
IN MISSOURI, YOU KNOW, THE LAWS
ALLOWED THEM TO RELEASE ALL THE
GRAND JURY TESTIMONY.
>> FINALLY, IS THERE ANY ACTION
THAT THE NEW YORK POLICE
DEPARTMENT CAN TAKE INDEPENDENT
OF THIS GRAND JURY OR THE
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE?
>> YEAH, ABSOLUTELY.
AS IT PERTAINS TO OFFICER
PANTALEO AND EVEN THE OTHER
OFFICER WITH HIM, THEY HAVE BOTH
BEEN PLACED ON MODIFIED DUETY.
THEY'RE LOOKING INTO DETERMINING
IF THEY VIOLATED ANY N.Y.P.D.
PROTOCOLS.
THE N.Y.P.D. PROTOCOLS SAY THERE
IS NO USE OF CHOKEHOLD ALLOWED.
IT WILL BE UP TO INTERNAL
AFFAIRS INVESTIGATORS TO
DETERMINE IF OFFICER PANTALEO
VIOLATED THAT AND THEN UP TO THE
BOARD TO MAKE A RECOMMENDATION
ON WHAT KIND OF DISMINUTE HE
GETS.
IT COULD BE UP TO AS FAR AS HIM
BEING FIRED FROM THE POLICE
FORCE BY POLICE COMMISSIONER
BRATTON.
>> PERVAIZ SHALLWANI OF THE
"WALL STREET JOURNAL," THANKS
VERY MUCH.
>>HAN TKS, HARI.
>> Woodruff: AIR BAG
MANUFACTURER TAKATA WAS BACK IN
THE SPOTLIGHT TODAY OVER IT'S
REFUSAL TO ENDORSE A NATIONWIDE
RECALL OF DEFECTIVE AIR BAGS.
THE JAPANESE FIRM FACED QUESTION
ON THAT DECISION AND OTHERS IN A
HEARING AT A U.S. HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES.
THE HEARING CAME JUST HOURS
AFTER A DEADLINE  FOR TAKATA TO
EXPAND ITS RECALL AS DEMANDED BY
THE NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC
SAFETY ADMINISTRATION OR NHTSA.
DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR DAVID
FRIEDMAN.
>> FIRST OF ALL, I WAS DEEPLY
DISAPPOINTED BY TAKATA'S
RESPONSE AND TAKATA'S FAILURE TO
TAKE RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE
DEFECTS THAT THEIR PRODUCTS.
FOR THE DEFECTS IN THEIR
PRODUCTS.
>> Woodruff: THE PROBLEM LIES
WITH INFLATORS THAT ACTIVATE SO
VIOLENTLY, THEY CAUSE THE AIR
BAGS TO EXPLODE.
THERE'VE BEEN AT LEAST FIVE
DEATHS AND DOZENS OF INJURIES
LINKED TO THE DEFECT WORLDWIDE.
TAKATA SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT
HIROSHI SHIMIZU INSISTED AGAIN
TODAY THAT ONLY PEOPLE WHO LIVE
IN HUMID CONDITIONS ARE AT RISK.
>> THE DATA STILL SUPPORTS THAT
WE SHOULD REMAIN FOCUSED ON THE
REGION WITH HIGH TEMPERATURE AND
HIGH HUMIDITY.
>> Woodruff: IN LINE WITH THAT
THINKING, ABOUT EIGHT MILLION
VEHICLES HAVE BEEN RECALLED IN
THE U.S., MOSTLY IN FLORIDA,
HAWAII, AND ALONG THE GULF
COAST.
TAKATA SAYS A NATIONWIDE RECALL
WOULD DOUBLE THAT FIGURE.
THE COMPANY REMAINED ADAMANT
TODAY THAT A NATIONWIDE RECALL
ISN'T SUPPORTED BY THE EVIDENCE.
BUT NHTSA'S FRIEDMAN POINTED TO
REPORTS OF AIR BAG EXPLOSIONS IN
OTHER PARTS OF THE COUNTRY.
>> BETWEEN THE FACT THAT THE
ROOT CAUSE ON THE DRIVER SIDE IS
NOT CLEAR NOW THAT IT'S CLEAR
THAT IT IS OUTSIDE THOSE AREAS
OF HIGH TEMPERATURES AND HIGH
HUMIDITY AND THE FACT THAT WE
NOW HAVE SIX TOTAL INCIDENTS IT
IS CLEAR TO US THAT A REGIONAL
RECALL IS NO LONGER APPROPRIATE
FOR THE DRIVER SIDE AIRBAGS.
>> Woodruff: THE AGENCY HAD
THREATENED TO TAKE LEGAL ACTION
AND IMPOSE FINES OF UP TO $35
MILLION UNLESS TAKATA COMPLIED.
BUT THE AIR BAG MAKER TOOK THE
POSITION TODAY THAT WASHINGTON
DOES NOT HAVE THE LEGAL
AUTHORITY TO MAKE A PARTS MAKER
ENFORCE A RECALL.
AND, FRIEDMAN ACKNOWLEDGED IT
COULD TAKE A PROTRACTED FIGHT.
>> WE NEED TO MAKE SURE THAT WE
BUILD THE STRONGEST CASE
POSSIBLE, BECAUSE AT THE END OF
THE DAY, IF TAKATA AND THE AUTO
MAKERS CONTINUE TO REFUSE TO
ACT, WE ARE GOING TO HAVE TO
TAKE THEM TO COURT.
WE WANT TO MAKE SURE WE HAVE A
CASE PREPARED THAT WILL WIN.
>> Woodruff: A NUMBER OF
LAWMAKERS VOICED FRUSTRATION
THAT EVEN REPLACING THE AIR BAGS
RECALLED SO FAR WILL TAKE MONTHS
TO COMPLETE.
AND THEY LET TAKATA'S VICE
PRESIDENT KNOW IT.
>> COMPLEXITY IS NOT AN EXCUSE
FOR INCOMPETENCE.
>> CONSTITUENTS WHO ARE
LITERALLY AFRAID TO DRIVE THEIR
CARS.
>> Woodruff: ACROSS THE CAPITOL,
AT A SENATE CONFIRMATION
HEARING, THE MAN NOMINATED TO
RUN NHTSA, MARK ROSEKIND, WAS
PRESSED TO MAKE THE AGENCY MORE
AGGRESSIVE.
MASSACHUSETTS DEMOCRAT ED
MARKEY.
>> YOU MUST MAKE TAKATA RECALL
ALL THESE AIRBAGS, YOU MUST
FORCE AUTO COMPS TO COMPLY,
THERE IS NO CHOICE, SAFETY OF
AMERICAN PEOPLE IS AT STAKE.
TAKATA IS TOYING WITH SAFETY OF
AMERICAN PEOPLE.
>> Woodruff: BUT THE WEIGHT OF
PUBLIC OPINION MAY BE HAVING
SOME EFFECT: TODAY, HONDA ONE OF
TAKATA'S BIGGEST CUSTOMERS
ANNOUNCED IT WILL EXPAND ITS OWN
RECALL OF DRIVER-SIDE AIR BAGS
TO ALL 50 STATES.
>> Ifill: TODAY, THE SUPREME
COURT HEARD ARGUMENTS IN THE
CASE OF PEGGY YOUNG, A FORMER
U.P.S. DRIVER, WHO SAYS THE
COMPANY DISCRIMINATED AGAINST
HER WHEN SHE WAS PREGNANT.
U.P.S. PLACED YOUNG ON UNPAID
LEAVE FOR SEVERAL MONTHS,
BECAUSE SHE WAS UNABLE TO
PERFORM HER REQUIRED DUTIES.
OUNGY'S LAWYERS SAY THE
COMPANY'S ACTIONS VIOLATED THE
PREGNANCY DISCRIMINATION ACT.
WOMEN'S RIGHTS GROUPS AND
MEMBERS OF CONGRESS RALLIED
OUTSIDE THE SUPREME COURT THIS
MORNING TO SUPPORT YOUNG'S
ARGUMENT.
BUT THERE ARE AT LEAST TWO SIDES
TO THE ARGUMENT.
JOINING US TO DESCRIBE WHAT
HAPPENED INSIDE THE COURT TODAY:
MARCIA COYLE OF THE NATIONAL LAW
JOURNAL.
EMILY MARTIN, VICE PRESIDENT AND
GENERAL COUNSEL FOR THE NATIONAL
WOMEN'S LAW CENTER.
AND, KAREN HARNED, EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OF THE NATIONAL
FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS'S SMALL BUSINESS LEGAL
CENTER.
LET'S LOOK AT THIS 1979 LAW, '78
LAW.
IF I PUT ON MY GLASSES, I CAN
SEE IT.
IT SAYS DISCRIMINATION ON THE
BASIS OF PREGNANCY IS ILLEGAL
AND PREGNANT WOMEN SHOULD BE
TREATED THE SAME AS ALL OTHER
PERSONS NOT SO AFFECTED BUT
SIMILAR IN THEIR ABILITY OR
INABILITY TO WORK.
SOUNDS PRETTY STRAIGHTFORWARD
AND PRETTY SIMPLE.
>> SIMPLE UNTIL YOU GET INTO THE
SUPREME COURT AND START ARGUING
WHAT THE LANGUAGE MEANS.
TODAY THE ARGUMENTS REALLY FOCUS
PRIMARILY ON THAT SECOND CLAUSE,
HOW TO TREAT PREGNANT WORKERS.
UPS HAS ARGUED AND IT ARGUED
TODAY THAT IT HAS BASICALLY A
PREGNANCY-BLIND POLICY.
IT OFFERS ACCOMMODATIONS TO
WORKERS WHOSE INJURIES OCCUR OR
CONDITIONS DEVELOP ON THE JOB,
NOT OFF THE JOB.
SO IT'S NOT SINGLING OUT
PREGNANT WORKERS.
THEY ARE BEING TREATED LIKE ALL
OF UPS' OTHER WORKERS WHO HAVE
INJURIES OR CONDITIONS THAT
DEVELOP OFF THE JOB.
IT LOOKED AT THAT SECOND CLAUSE
AND SAID, THAT'S NOT A
FREE-STANDING, INDEPENDENT CLAIM
TO CHARGE DISCRIMINATION AGAINST
U.P.S.
IT IS TIED TO THE BASIC
PROHIBITION AGAINST PREGNANCY
DISCRIMINATION.
WELL, MISS YOUNG'S ATTORNEY
SAYS, LET'S LOOK AT THE LANGUAGE
OF THAT CLAUSE AGAIN.
IT SAYS NOTHING ABOUT
ON-THE-JOB, OFF-THE-JOB
DISTINCTIONS.
IT ALSO DOESN'T SPEAK TO THE
CAUSE OR THE SOURCE OF THE
LIMITATION ON THE WORKER.
INSTEAD IT SAYS, "YOU'RE TO
COMPARE THE PREGNANT WORKER'S
LIMITATION WITH A NON-PREGNANT
WORKERS WHO HAVE SIMILAR
LIMITATIONS ON THEIR ABILITY OR
INABILITY TO DO THE JOB."
AND ALSO HE CLAIMS UPS DOESN'T
HAVE A PREGNANCY-BLIND POLICY
BECAUSE IT DOES OFFER
ACCOMMODATIONS TO WORKERS WHO
LOSE THEIR DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION CERTIFICATE.
IT ALLOWS THEM TO DRIVE.
IT ALSO ACCOMMODATES WITH
WORKERS WITH CONDITIONS
RECOGNIZED BY THE AMERICANS WITH
DISABILITIES ACT.
>> Ifill: I GATHER THIS IS A
LIVELY SET OF ARGUMENTS.
>> VERY LIVELY.
JUSTICE SCALIA AND SOME OTHER
JUSTICES LOOKED AT THE WAY
MRS. YOUNG'S ATTORNEY READS THAT
CLAUSE.
JUSTICE SCALIA USED THE PHRASE,
"IT'S SO BROAD THE WAY YOU'RE
READING IT THAT YOU'RE SEEKING
MOST-FAVORED NATION TREATMENT
FOR PREGNANT WORKERS."
WELL, HE WAS SORT OF EXPRESSING
THE CONCERN THAT BUSINESSES THAT
ARE SUPPORTING UPS SAY HERE,
THAT ANY TIME AN EMPLOYER GIVES
AN ACCOMMODATION TO A WORKER
WITH A LIMITATION, REGARDLESS OF
HOW IT HAPPENED OR ITS SEVERITY,
A PREGNANT WORKER IS GOING TO
SEEK THAT SAME ACCOMMODATION.
BUT ON THE OTHER SIDE, JUSTICES
GINSBURG AND JUSTICE KAGAN, FOR
EXAMPLE, SAID THAT UPS' READING
IS SO NARROW THAT IT IS GIVING
LEAST-FAVORED NATION TREATMENT
TO PREGNANT WORKERS.
AND ALSO THE READING, ACCORDING
TO JUSTICE KAGAN, IT REALLY
MAKES THE SECOND CLAUSE
REDUNDANT HERE, MEANINGLESS, AND
CONGRESS COULD NOT HAVE INTENDED
TO DO THAT.
>> Ifill: THE ADMINISTRATION
HAD ARGUED AGAINST BRINGING THIS
CASE.
NOW IT'S ON THE OTHER SIDE.
HOW DID THAT FLIP HAPPEN?
>> WELL, IT DIDN'T ARGUE BECAUSE
IT DIDN'T THINK THE CASE WAS NOT
WORTHY, BUT THE ADMINISTRATION
DID HAVE A CHANGE OF POLICY.
FOR MANY YEARS IT READ THAT
SECTION THE SAME WAY THAT UPS
READS IT.
IN 2014, THIS YEAR, OVER THE
SUMMER THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION ISSUED
NEW GUIDANCE.
ITS GUIDANCE ON THIS SUPPORTS
MRS. YOUNG'S INTERPRETATION OF
THE LAW.
SINCE THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
DOES FOLLOW EEOC GUIDANCE, THAT
IS HOW THE ADMINISTRATION IS
PURSUING THESE CASES NOW.
>> Ifill: KAREN HARNED, I WANT
TO START WITH WHAT THE DEBATE
IS.
IS THIS A DEBATE BETWEEN
EMPLOYEES' RIGHTS AND EMPLOYERS'
RIGHTS?
>> WELL, IT'S REALLY A DEBATE
BETWEEN... WE WOULD FIRST SAY
IT'S A DEBATE ON WHAT THE LAW
ACTUALLY SAYS, AND WE WOULD BE
IN THE CATEGORY THAT WE
DEFINITELY BELIEVE THAT IF MISS
YOUNG WERE TO PREVAIL, IT WOULD
CREATE A SUPER PROTECTIVE CLASS
FOR THE PREGNANT WORKER.
OUR CONCERN REALLY IS THAT THERE
NEEDS TO BE LIMITS.
IF MISS YOUNG WERE TO PREVAIL,
THERE WOULDN'T BE THE LIMITS
THAT YOU EVEN SEE WITH THE
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT
WHERE IF AN ACCOMMODATION WOULD
BE AN UNDUE HARDSHIP ON A
BUSINESS, THAT WOULD BE
CONSIDERED AND QIEWD ALSO LOOK
AT WHETHER OR NOT THE
ACCOMMODATION WAS REASONABLE.
THESE ARE REALLY QUESTIONS THAT
ARE BETTER ANSWERED IN CONGRESS
AND THE STATE LEGISLATURES, NOT
THROUGH THE SUPREME COURT WE
THINK REWRITING THE LAW.
>> Ifill: EMILY MARTIN, ARE WE
JUST ARGUING THIS DEBATE IN THE
WRONG PLACE?
>> I THINK THIS CASE IS
CRITICALLY IMPORTANT BECAUSE
IT'S ABOUT WHETHER THE PREGNANCY
DISCRIMINATION ACT MEANS WHAT IT
SAYS.
IT'S OF CRITICAL IMPORTANCE FOR
WOMEN AROUND THE COUNTRY.
UNFORTUNATELY, PEGGY YOUNG'S
STORY IS NOT UNIQUE.
AT THE NATIONAL WOMEN'S LAW
CENTER WE HEAR AGAIN AND AGAIN
FROM WOMEN WHO HAVE LOST THEIR
JOB, HAVE LOST THEIR PAYCHECK
BECAUSE THEIR EMPLOYER REFUSES
TO MAKE A SIMPLE ACCOMMODATION
LIKE LETTING THE CASH SHEEN SIT
AT A STOOL DURING AN EIGHT-HOUR
SHIFT LATE IN HER PREGNANCY.
AS A RESULT, WOMEN ARE BEING
FORCED TO CHOOSE BETWEEN THEIR
JOBS AND A HEALTHY PREGNANCY.
THAT'S NOT A CHOICE ANYBODY
SHOULD HAVE TO MAKE.
>> Ifill: WHAT IS THE
DIFFERENCE, I WANT TO ASK THE
TWO OF YOU, WHAT'S THE
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN O'MITTING
COVERAGE FOR A PROTECTED CLASS
OR ACTIVELY DISCRIMINATING?
>> WHAT IS YOUR SENSE ABOUT
THAT?
>> WELL, I THINK, AND UPS ARGUED
THIS TODAY, THERE ARE GOOD
BUSINESS REASONS WHY A COMPANY
IS GOING TO HAVE DIFFERENT
CLASSES OF BENEFITS FOR
DIFFERENT CLASSES OF EMPLOYEES.
PART-TIME VERSUS FULL-TIME.
IN THIS INSTANCE THOSE INJURED
ON THE JOB VERSUS THOSE NOT,
WHICH IS VERY COMMON.
YOU NEED TO BE ABLE TO HAVE THAT
FLEXIBILITY, AND THEN ALSO FOR
THE SMALL EMPLOYER IN
PARTICULAR, THEIR ABILITY TO
BACKFILL AND MAKE UP FOR WORK
LOST BY AN MIY IS MUCH MORE
DIFFICULT WHEN YOU'RE LOOKING AT
A WORKFORCE OF 15 OR 16 THAN
WITH ONE OF 200 OR MORE.
>> DO THE ANTI-PREGNANCY
DISCRIMINATION LAWS THAT EXIST
RULE OUT ALLOWING THAT PROTECTED
CLASS FOR THIS PARTICULAR SUBSET
OF EMPLOYEES?
>> THE PREGNANCY DISCRIMINATION
ACT WAS PASSED FOR A VERY
SPECIFIC REASON, TO REPUDIATE A
PREVIOUS SUPREME COURT CASE FROM
1976 WHERE THE SUPREME COURT
SAID IT'S NOT SEX DISCRIMINATION
FOR AN EMPLOYER TO HAVE A
TEMPORARY DISABILITY INSURANCE
POLICY THAT COVERS ALL ACCIDENTS
AND INJURIES AND EXCLUDES
PREGNANCY.
CONGRESS SAID VERY CLEARLY, NO,
YOU HAVE TO TREAT PREGNANCY THE
WAY YOU TREAT OTHER DISABILITIES
AND INJURIES TH CAATN HAVE AN
EFFECT ON A PERSON'S ABILITY TO
WORK.
THAT WAS THE PRECISE PURPOSE OF
THE PREGNANCY DISCRIMINATION
ACT, TO KEEP PREGNANT WORKERS
FROM BEING TREATED LIKE
SECOND-CLASS CITIZENS IN THE
WORKPLACE.
>> Ifill: SO WHAT YOU'RE
SAYG IINS THE ARGUMENT THAT
KAREN CANE MAKES IS A
SECOND-CLASS CITIZENS ARGUMENT?
>> I THINK THAT WHAT UPS IS
ARGUING IS THAT THE FACT THEY
HAVE FOUND A WAY TO ACCOMMODATE
PEOPLE WITH ON-THE-JOB INJURIES,
PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES UNDER
THE A.D.A.M., PEOPLE WHO HAVE
LOST THEIR COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S
LICENSE, THAT SHOULD MEAN THAT
THEY CAN ACCOMMODATE PREGNANT
WORKERS, TOO.
THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT THE
PREGNANCY DISCRIMINATION ACT WAS
INTENDED TO CREATE.
>> Ifill: IT SHOULD BE SAID
THAT BOTH UPS HAS CHANGED THEIR
POLICY AND THE EEOC HAS CHANGED
ITS GUIDELINES SINCE THIS CASE
CAME.
>> I WOULD PUT TO ALL EMPLOYERS,
THIS ONE-SIZE-FITS-ALL IS NOT
GOING TO WORK.
WHEN YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT SMALL
WORKFORCE, MAYBE A SMALL
RESTAURANT WITH ONLY THREE
SERVERS WORKING OVER THE
WEEKEND, YOU LOSE ONE OF THOSE
SERVERS OR SOME OF THEIR
ABILITIES TO WORK, THAT'S MUCH
HARDER FOR A SMALL BUSINESS
OWNER TO ADDRESS.
THAT'S WHY YOU NEED THE BALANCE
THAT YOU GET IN THINGS LIKE THE
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT
WHERE YOU'RE ALSO LOOKING AT
UNDUE HARDSHIP, WHAT IS A
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION FOR
THOSE BUSINESS OPERATIONS TO
CONTINUE.
THOSE ARE DEBATES THAT NEED TO
HAPPEN IN CONGRESS, NOT AT THE
COURT.
>> BUT THE PREGNANCY
DISCRIMINATION ACT ONLY REQUIRES
EQUAL TREATMENT.
SO IT REQUIRES THE EMPLOYER TO
DO FOR THE PREGNANT WORKER WHAT
IT'S ALREADY DOING FOR ANOTHER
WORKER WHO HAS A SIMILAR
INABILITY TO WORK.
>> Ifill: ONE OF THE THING I
FIND MOST INTERESTING ABOUT THIS
CASE IS THE ODD BEDFELLOWS THAT
AGREE ON THIS.
YOU SELDOM SEE PRO-LIFE AND
PRO-CHOICE MAKING THE SAME CASE.
>> I CAN'T REMEMBER WHEN THAT
HAS HAPPENED IN THE PAST.
YOU HAVE CIVIL LIBERTIES GROUP,
WOMEN'S RIGHTS GROUP, AS YOU
SAID, I THINK SOMETHING LIKE 23
PRO-LIFE ORGANIZATIONS HAVE ALL
JOINED TO SUPPORT MISS YOUNG.
>> Ifill: WHAT IS THE COMMON
THREAD?
>> THE NEED TO ENSURE THAT
PREGNANT WOMEN WHO ARE IN THE
WORKFORCE DO GET EQUAL TREATMENT
AND AREN'T FORCED, AS MISS YOUNG
WAS, TO GO ON UNPAID LEAVE,
WHERE SHE ALSO LEAST HER HEALTH
INSURANCE.
ON THE OTHER SIDE OF UPS, AS YOU
WOULD EXPECT, ARE BUSINESSES
LARGE AND SMALL AND ALSO A
RATHER CONSERVATIVE WOMEN'S
GROUP, THE EAGLE FORUM.
>> Ifill: MARCIA COYLE, EMILY
MARTIN AND KAREN HARNED OF THE
NATIONAL FEDERATION OF
INDEPENDENT BUSINESS, THANK YOU
ALL VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Woodruff: FOR THE FIRST TIME
IN MORE THAN FOUR DECADES, NASA
IS SET TO LAUNCH A SPACE CAPSULE
TOMORROW THAT HAS GRANDER PLANS
OF HUMAN EXPLORATION INTO DEEP
SPACE.
THE LIFTOFF FOR THE ORION
SPACECRAFT WILL BE UNMANNED.
BUT IT IS AN IMPORTANT TEST
FLIGHT, AND THE FIRST OF MANY,
AS NASA TRIES TO CHART A LONGER-
TERM VISION FOR HUMAN FLIGHT.
SCIENCE CORRESPONDENT MILES
O'BRIEN HAS OUR REPORT.
>>>> AT A 50-YEAR-OLD FACILITY
THAT TESTED THE CAPSULE,
ENGINEERS ARE WORKING ON WAYS TO
PROTECT A CREW OF ASTRONAUTS
RETURNING TO EARTH FROM A VOYAGE
TO MARS.
>> IT'S REALLY A WHOLE NEW
BALLGAME IN TERMS OF MISSION
REQUIREMENTS AND WHAT WE'VE DONE
BEFORE.
>> AEROSPACE ENGINEERS ARE
WORKING ON A THERMAL PROTECTION
SYSTEM FOR NASA'S ORION
SPACECRAFT, A CAPSULE THAT HAS
BEEN DESCRIBED AS APOLLO ON
STEROIDS.
>> SO WHAT WE USE IS A MATERIAL
CALLED AVCOAT, IT'S A DERIVATION
OF THE SAME MATERIAL USED IN THE
APOLLO PROGRAM FOR THE APOLLO
HEAT SHIELD.
ON THE ORION HEAT SHIELD, THERE
ARE OVER 300,000 OF THESE
INDIVIDUAL CELLS THAT ARE ALL
FILLED BY HAND.
>> HE'S USING THE VENERABLE
FACILITY AT NASA'S AMES RESEARCH
CENTER TO TORCH SMALL SAM PRIME
MINISTERS OF THE HEAT SHIELD
WITH BLISTERING HOT GASSES
MOVING AT HYPERSONIC SPEEDS IN A
VACUUM.
IT'S AS CLOSE TO A REAL RE-ENTRY
FROM SPACE AS YOU CAN GET ON THE
GROUND.
>> THIS IS A FOUR-INCH DIAMETER
PUCK.
THE ORION CAPSULE IS FIVE MEET
CENTERS DIAMETER.
WE REALLY RELY AT THE END OF THE
DAY ON A FLIGHT TEST TO TELL US
HOW THOSE PARTS OF THE SYSTEM
WILL WORK.
>> EFT1 OR EXPLORATION FLIGHT
TEST 1, WILL SUBJECT A ORION
CAPSULE TO A REAL-WORLD TRIAL BY
FIRE ON ITS MAIDEN VOYAGE,
GIVING NASA THE DATA THEY NEED
AND A BIG MILESTONE.
BILL HILL IS A NASA ASSOCIATE
ADMINISTRATOR.
>> EFT1 IS ABSOLUTELY THE
BIGGEST THING THAT THIS AGENCY
IS GOING TO DO THIS YEAR.
>> ORION IS SLATED TO ORBIT THE
EARTH TWICE, ONCE AT AN ALTITUDE
OF ABOUT 500 MILES.
THEN IT WILL GET A LIFT FROM A
SECOND-STAGE BOOSTER TO 3,600
MILES, HIGH ENOUGH FOR THE
CAPSULE TO BE EXPOSED TO A BIG
DECEMBER OF SPACE RADIATION AND
TO CREATE ENOUGH SPEED ON
RE-ENTRY TO GENERATE 80% OF THE
HEAT IT WOULD ENCOUNTER ON A
RETURN FROM THE MOON.
>> THIS IS REALLY OUR FIRST STEP
IN OUR JOURNEY TO MARS.
>> NASA ENVISIONS A HUMAN
PRESENCE ON MARS IN THE MID-20
30s.
CHARLIE BOWDEN IS THE AGENCY'S
ADMINISTRATOR.
>> I USE THE TERM PIONEER
INSTEAD OF EXPLORER.
EXPLORING IMPLIES WE'LL GO OUT
AND COME BACK LIKE LEWIS AND
CLARK.
WE'RE INTENDING TO PIONEER MARS,
WHICH MEANS WE'LL PUT PEOPLE ON
THAT PLANET TO BE THERE
PERMANENTLY.
>> BUT NASA IS A LONG WAY FROM
THAT.
>> IF YOU ASK US TO GO TO MARS
TODAY, WE DON'T THINK WE'RE IN
THE RIGHT RISK POSTURE.
>> THE MAN IN CHARGE OF HUMAN
SPACE EXPLORATION AT NASA SAYS
THE CURRENT PLAN CALLS FOR AN
UNPEOPLED ORION CAN SELL TO
ORBIT TE MOHON IN 2018 AND IN
2021 OR 2022 CARRY TWO
ASTRONAUTS ON A SHORT VISIT TO
SMALL ASTEROID OR A PIECE OF A
LARGER ONE THAT WOULD BE
ROBOTICALLY GRABBED AND NUDGED
INTO LUNAR ORBIT.
THERE ARE NO FIRM PLANS FOR WHAT
HAPPENED AFTER THAT.
ENGINEERS ARE DEALING WITH SOME
BIG TECHNICAL HURDLES, HOW TO
PROTECT THE CREW FROM RADIATION,
HOW TO LAND SOMETHING MUCH
BIGGER THAN A COMPACT CAR-SIZED
ROVER ON MARS, AND HOW HUMANS
CAN SAFELY OPERATE INDEPENDENT
FROM SUPPORT FROM EARTH.
>> THE BASIC STRATEGY THAT WE'RE
TRYING TO DO AS WE DO A SERIES
OF TEST, EACH ONE OF MORE AND
MORE COMPLEXITY AND MOREND A
MORE CHALLENGE, THAT WE CONTINUE
TO ADD UNTIL EVENTUALLY WE BUILD
THE CAPABILITIES AND THE SKILLS
AND THE OPERATIONAL TECHNIQUES
AND THE RISK MANAGEMENT
PHILOSOPHY THAT ALLOWS US TO GO
TO MARS.
>> THERE ARE MANY SEASONED HANDS
IN THE SPACE WORLD WHO WONDER IF
THE AGENCY'S BIG PLANS TO VISIT
THE RED PLANET MAY BECOME LOST
IN SPACE.
TOM YOUNG IS AMONG THEM.
>> I THINK A FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM
WE HAVE WITH TODAY'S MARS
STRATEGY IS THAT IT'S NOT
CONSISTENT WITH THE AVAILABLE
BUDGET, AND WE DON'T HAVE THE
FUNDS TO REALLY MAKE IT AN
EXECUTABLE PLAN.
>> YOUNG IS A VETERAN AEROSPACE
EXECUTIVE WHO KNOWS A LITTLE
SOMETHING ABOUT GETTING TO THE
RED PLANET.
>> I'M ASSUMING WE MUST BE
SITTING RIGHT ON THE X.
SO THAT'S A SMOOTH AREA.
SO EVERYBODY JUST DID FABULOUS.
COULDN'T BE MORE PLEASED.
THANK YOU.
>> HE WAS NASA'S PROGRAM MANAGER
FOR THE VIKING MISSIONS IN THE
MID-'70s, WHICH ACCOMPLISHED
THE FIRST AND SECOND SUCCESSFUL
LANDINGS ON MARS.
>> WE IT'S VERY TO AUGUSTMENT
THE RESOURCES TO MAKE THE GOAL
ACHIEVABLE OR WE'VE GOT TO
ADJUST THE GOAL TO BE SOMETHING
THAT'S CONSISTENT WITH THE
AVAILABLE RESOURCES BECAUSE IF
WE DON'T, WHAT WE'RE
FUNDAMENTALLY GOING TO DO IS
WE'RE GOING TO WASTE A LOT OF
MONEY.
>> IGNITION AND LIFTOFF.
>> IN 2010, PRESIDENT OBAMA
CANCELED THE BUSH
ADMINISTRATION'S CONSTELLATION
PROGRAM.
WHICH ENVISIONED A RUSH TO THE
MOON.
>> I UNDERSTAND THAT SOME
BELIEVE WE SHOULD ATTEMPT A
RETURN TO THE SURFACE OF THE
MOON FIRST.
AS PREVIOUSLY PLANNED.
BUT I JUST HAVE TO SAY PRETTY
BLUNTLY HERE, WE'VE BEEN THERE
BEFORE.
>> OBAMA WANTED NASA TO USE THE
MONEY CONSTELLATION WOULD HAVE
SPENT ON A CAN SELL AND ROCKET
MADE OF APOLLO AND SHUTTLE
LEGACY HARDWARE TO PUSH THE
DEVELOPMENT OF NEW PROPULSION
TECHNOLOGY AND SEED THE PRIVATE
SECTOR TO BILL NEW VEHICLES, BUT
THE CANCELLATION OF
CONSTELLATION RUFFLED THE
FEATHERS OF SOME HEAVYWEIGHTS IN
THE AEROSPACE WORLD AND ON
CAPITOL HILL.
SENATOR RICHARD SHELBY OF
ALABAMA REPRESENTS NASA'S
PRIMARY ROCKET-BUILDING
FACILITY, HUNTSVILLE'S MARSHALL
SPACE FLIGHT CENTER.
HE HELPED FORCE THE
ADMINISTRATION TO SPEND LESS ON
NEW TECHNOLOGY AND INSTEAD
DESIGN A ROCKET CALLED THE SPACE
LAUNCH SYSTEM OR SLS.
LED BY SHELBY'S CONSTITUENTS IN
HUNTSVILLE, SLS IS BEING BUILT
WITH BEEFED-UP, SHUTTLE-STYLE
BOOSTERS AND SHUTTLE MNAI
ENGINES.
>> THESE WERE VERY SUCCESSFUL
WE DO KNOW WHAT WE HAVE.
ENGINES.
THAT'S WHY WE LEARN.
WE DO KNOW WHAT WE HAVE.
THIS IS TOMORROW'S TECHNOLOGY.
THAT'S WHY WE LEARN.
WE'LL LEARN FROM THIS.
THIS IS TOMORROW'S TECHNOLOGY.
THERE WILL BE OTHER THINGS THAT
WE'LL LEARN FROM THIS.
WILL COME OUT OF IT THAT WILL BE
THERE WILL BE OTHER THINGS THAT
POSITIVE.
WILL COME OUT OF IT THAT WILL BE
BUT YOU JUST DON'T REINVENT THE
POSITIVE.
WHEEL.
BUT YOU JUST DON'T REINVENT THE
YOU BUILD ON THE WHEEL.
WHEEL.
THESE WERE GOOD WHEELS.
YOU BUILD ON THE WHEEL.
>> BUT AS IT IS, SLS DOES NOT
THESE WERE GOOD WHEELS.
HAVE ENOUGH THURST TO GO ANY
>> BUT AS IT IS, SLS DOES NOT
FURTHER THAN LUNAR ORBIT.
HAVE ENOUGH THURST TO GO ANY
THAT'S WHAT PROMPTED THE IDEA OF
FURTHER THAN LUNAR ORBIT.
BRINGING AN ASTEROID TO THE
THAT'S WHAT PROMPTED THE IDEA OF
MOON.
BRINGING AN ASTEROID TO THE
OTHERWISE SLS IS A ROCKET
MOON.
WITHOUT A DESTINATION.
OTHERWISE SLS IS A ROCKET
FOR A MISSION TO MARS, IT WILL
WITHOUT A DESTINATION.
NEED A REDESIGN WITH MORE
FOR A MISSION TO MARS, IT WILL
POWERFUL BOOSTERS AND A NEW
NEED A REDESIGN WITH MORE
SECOND-STAGE MOTOR.
POWERFUL BOOSTERS AND A NEW
FORMER NASA DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR
SECOND-STAGE MOTOR.
LORI GARVER WAS ONE OF THE
FORMER NASA DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR
LEADING PROPONENTS OF THE
LORI GARVER WAS ONE OF THE
ORIGINAL OBAMA SPACE PLAN.
LEADING PROPONENTS OF THE
>> IF YOU WERE DRIVING TO MARS,
ORIGINAL OBAMA SPACE PLAN.
THERE WERE A NUMBER OF THINGS
>> IF YOU WERE DRIVING TO MARS,
YOU'D BE DOING THAT WE'RE NOT
THERE WERE A NUMBER OF THINGS
DOING NOW THAT ARE THE DIFFICULT
YOU'D BE DOING THAT WE'RE NOT
THINGS.
DOING NOW THAT ARE THE DIFFICULT
YOU WOULDN'T BE BUILDING A
THINGS.
SPACECRAFT NOW BASED ON
YOU WOULDN'T BE BUILDING A
TECHNOLOGY FROM 40 YEARS AGO,
SPACECRAFT NOW BASED ON
ENGINES FROM 40 YEARS AGO TO GO
TECHNOLOGY FROM 40 YEARS AGO,
SOMEWHERE IN 20 YEARS AND
ENGINES FROM 40 YEARS AGO TO GO
SPENDING $3 TO $4 BILLION A YEAR
SOMEWHERE IN 20 YEARS AND
ON THAT.
SPENDING $3 TO $4 BILLION A YEAR
>> GARVER BELIEVES NASA'S
ON THAT.
CURRENT PATH TO MARS IS A HYBRID
>> GARVER BELIEVES NASA'S
OF IDEAS BORNE NOT OF
CURRENT PATH TO MARS IS A HYBRID
ENGINEERING ELEGANCE BUT
OF IDEAS BORNE NOT OF
POLITICAL COMPROMISE.
ENGINEERING ELEGANCE BUT
>> THE PURPOSE HAS BECOME
POLITICAL COMPROMISE.
POLITICAL AND JOBS, AND I THINK
>> THE PURPOSE HAS BECOME
WE'RE... WE'VE LOST THE SORT OF
POLITICAL AND JOBS, AND I THINK
UNIFYING VIEW THAT EXPLORATION
WE'RE... WE'VE LOST THE SORT OF
IS SOMETHING THAT WE DO AS A
UNIFYING VIEW THAT EXPLORATION
SPECIES.
IS SOMETHING THAT WE DO AS A
WE SHOULD HAVE THAT BROADER
SPECIES.
PURPOSE RATHER THAN JUST A
WE SHOULD HAVE THAT BROADER
POLITICAL NEEDS OF A FEW MEMBERS
PURPOSE RATHER THAN JUST A
OF CONGRESS WITH JOBS IN THEIR
POLITICAL NEEDS OF A FEW MEMBERS
DISTRICT.
OF CONGRESS WITH JOBS IN THEIR
>> SENATOR SHELBY REJECTS THE
DISTRICT.
NOTION THAT SPACE EXPLORATION
>> SENATOR SHELBY REJECTS THE
HAS BECOME A JOBS PROGRAM.
NOTION THAT SPACE EXPLORATION
>> WELL, I'D BE AGAINST A JOBS
HAS BECOME A JOBS PROGRAM.
PROGRAM.
>> WELL, I'D BE AGAINST A JOBS
I'M FOR THE CUTTING-EDGE OF
PROGRAM.
SPACE.
I'M FOR THE CUTTING-EDGE OF
JOBS COME WITH IT IF YOU'VE GOT
SPACE.
A GOOD SYSTEM THAT YOU'RE
JOBS COME WITH IT IF YOU'VE GOT
BUILDING.
A GOOD SYSTEM THAT YOU'RE
I BELIEVE THIS WILL BE A GOOD
BUILDING.
SYSTEM AND BE GOOD FOR THE SPACE
I BELIEVE THIS WILL BE A GOOD
PROGRAM.
SYSTEM AND BE GOOD FOR THE SPACE
OTHERWISE I WOULDN'T SUPPORT IT.
PROGRAM.
>> BUT WILL A HALF A LOAF WITH A
OTHERWISE I WOULDN'T SUPPORT IT.
SIDE OF BACON EVER GET NASA TO
>> BUT WILL A HALF A LOAF WITH A
MARS?
SIDE OF BACON EVER GET NASA TO
IS THERE ENOUGH MONEY IN NASA'S
MARS?
BUDGET TO PAY FOR THE COMPROMISE
IS THERE ENOUGH MONEY IN NASA'S
AND STILL REACH THE STARS?
BUDGET TO PAY FOR THE COMPROMISE
JOHN HOLDREN IS PRESIDENT
AND STILL REACH THE STARS?
OBAMA'S SCIENCE ADVISER.
JOHN HOLDREN IS PRESIDENT
>> I DON'T THINK THE CURRENT
OBAMA'S SCIENCE ADVISER.
APPROACH OF KICKING THE CAN DOWN
>> I DON'T THINK THE CURRENT
THE ROAD MAY AMOUNT TO WITHIN
APPROACH OF KICKING THE CAN DOWN
REASONABLE LIMITS GETTING DOWN
THE ROAD MAY AMOUNT TO WITHIN
THE STEPS WE NEED TO ACHIEVE IN
REASONABLE LIMITS GETTING DOWN
ORDER ULTIMATELY TO GET TO MARS.
THE STEPS WE NEED TO ACHIEVE IN
EVENTUALLY, YES, BETWEEN NOW AND
ORDER ULTIMATELY TO GET TO MARS.
THE 2030s, WE WOULD MEADE TO
EVENTUALLY, YES, BETWEEN NOW AND
RAMP UP THE BUDGET.
THE 2030s, WE WOULD MEADE TO
AT THE CURRENT BUDGET, WE WILL
RAMP UP THE BUDGET.
NOT GET TO MARS, THAT'S CORRECT.
AT THE CURRENT BUDGET, WE WILL
>> DURING ORION'S FIRST FLIGHT,
NOT GET TO MARS, THAT'S CORRECT.
NASA ENGINEERS AIM TO TEST THE
>> DURING ORION'S FIRST FLIGHT,
RISKIEST EVENTS, THINGS THAT
NASA ENGINEERS AIM TO TEST THE
HAVE TO WORK RIGHT FIRST TIME
RISKIEST EVENTS, THINGS THAT
WHEN ASTRONAUTS ARE ON BOARD.
HAVE TO WORK RIGHT FIRST TIME
BUT THE BIGGEST RISK TO THE
WHEN ASTRONAUTS ARE ON BOARD.
OVERARCHING GOAL MAY HAVE MORE
BUT THE BIGGEST RISK TO THE
TO DO WITH POLITICAL SCIENCE
OVERARCHING GOAL MAY HAVE MORE
THAN ROCKET SCIENCE.
TO DO WITH POLITICAL SCIENCE
MILES O'BRIEN, THE PBS
THAN ROCKET SCIENCE.
"NEWSHOUR," WASHINGTON.
MILES O'BRIEN, THE PBS
>> Ifill: ONLINE WE HAVE A
"NEWSHOUR," WASHINGTON.
SLIDESHOW OF ORION'S JOURNEY TO
>> Ifill: ONLINE WE HAVE A
THE LAUNCHPAD.
SLIDESHOW OF ORION'S JOURNEY TO
AND YOU CAN WATCH THE LAUNCH
THE LAUNCHPAD.
LIVE TOMORROW MORNING AT 7 A.M.
AND YOU CAN WATCH THE LAUNCH
EASTERN ON OUR HOMEPAGE.
>> Ifill: WE'LL BE BACK WITH A
CONVERSATION WITH SECRETARY OF
THE INTERIOR SALLY JEWELL ON
REFORMING THE EDUCATION SYSTEM
FOR NATIVE AMERICANS.
BUT FIRST, IT'S PLEDGE WEEK ON
PBS.
THIS BREAK ALLOWS YOUR PUBLIC
TELEVISION STATION TO ASK FOR
YOUR SUPPORT.
AND THAT SUPPORT HELPS KEEP
PROGRAMS LIKE OURS ON THE AIR.
>> Woodruff: NOW THE
SUBSTANTIAL PROBLEMS THAT NATIVE
AMERICANS IN THE U.S. FACE,
PARTICULARLY WITH EDUCATION.
THAT WAS THE FOCUS OF A NEW
REPORT ISSUED TODAY AND A
MEETING PRESIDENT OBAMA HAD WITH
NATIVE AMERICANS IN WASHINGTON.
THE PRESIDENT ANNOUNCED A SERIES
OF INITIATIVES TO PREPARE YOUNG
AMERICAN INDIANS FOR COLLEGE AND
THE WORKFORCE.
THEY INCLUDE A PUSH TO
STRENGTHEN TRIBAL CONTROL OF
EDUCATION ON RESERVATIONS.
THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF INDIAN
EDUCATION IS RESPONSIBLE FOR
EDUCATING NEARLY 50,000 STUDENTS
IN 23 STATES.
THE HIGH SCHOOL GRADUATION RATE
IS FOR NATIVE AMERICANS THE
LOWEST OF ANY ETHNIC OR RACIAL
GROUP.
THE BUREAU IS PART OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND
INTERIOR SECRETARY SALLY JEWELL
JOINS ME NOW.
WELCOME TO THE NEWS HOUR.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> WE KNOW THE PROBLEMS IN THE
NATIVE AMERICAN COMMUNITY.
THEY'RE DEEPLY ENTRENCHEDMENT
THEY GO BACK A LONG TIME TO THE
VERY BEGINNING OF THIS COUNTRY.
WHAT ARE JUST A COUPLE OF THE
WAYS THE ADMINISTRATION THINKS
IT CAN MAKE A REAL DIFFERENCE.
>> WELL, THE REPORT THAT THE
WHITE HOUSE JUST ISSUED ON
NATIVE AMERICAN USE DOES A VERY
GOOD JOB OF CHRONICLING THE
CHALLENGES.
THEY ARE DEEP SEEDED.
THEY'VE BEEN ALONG FOR NOT JUST
DECADES BUT LITERALLY HUNDREDS
OF YEARS.
POLICIES THAT TRIED TO KILL THE
INDIAN TO SAVE THE MAN.
POLICIES OF ASSIMILATION, OF
SQUISHING CULTURES AND IN SO
DOING, THEY REALLY DIMINISH THE
CONFIDENCE AND THE PRIDE OF
NATIVE AMERICANS.
WHAT THE PRESIDENT HAS DONE AND
HE'S CHARGED HIS CABINET WITH
THIS, AND THIS WAS REALLY
POWERFULLY BREAKTHROUGH HOME TO
HIM IN A VISIT WITH YOUNG PEOPLE
AT THE STANDING ROCK SIOUX TRIBE
, IS HE DOES NOT WANT THE
STAND BY AND WATCH THIS HAPPEN
ANYMORE.
HE'S CHARGED HIS ADMINISTRATION
VERY DIRECTLY WITH BEING PART OF
THE SOLUTION, WITH CHARTING A
DIFFERENT COURSE.
THAT'S WHAT WE'RE DOING.
>> THE CHALLENGES WE KNOW
BECAUSE OF ALL THE ATTENTION ON
IT TODAY FACING YOUNG NATIVE
AMERICANS, PARTICULARLY TOUGH.
I WAS READING MORE THAN
ONE-THIRD OF THEM LIVE IN
POVERTY.
THE STATISTICS WE JUST REPORTED
THEM ARE REALLY DISCOURAGING.
FIRST OF ALL, HOW DID IT GET SO
BAD.
HOW CAN THE ADMINISTRATION MAKE
A REAL DIFFERENCE THIS TIME?
>> WILL, THE SHORT ANSWER IS
THERE HAVE BEEN REPORTS THAT
HAVE GONE BACK FOR DECADES.
THERE'S A MAJOR REPORT UNDER
PRESIDENT KENNEDY'S LEADERSHIP
ON INDIAN EDUCATION THAT SHOWED
MANY OF THE SAME PROBLEMS.
AND THE DISTANCE TODAY AND THE
DIFFERENCE THAT WE BELIEVE
STRONGLY IN IS AROUND TURNING
OVER CONTROL OF THESE SCHOOLS TO
TRIBAL LEADERSHIP.
IN GIVING THEM THE TOOLS THEY
NEED TO FIGURE OUT WHERE THE
BRIGHT SPOTS, WHAT'S GOING WELL
AND WHY, SO THAT WE CAN HELP
THEM BRING THOSE LESSONS TO
THEIR SCHOOLS, AND YET THEY HAVE
ACCOUNTABILITY.
YOU MENTIONED 23 STATES.
THAT'S 23 DIFFERENT SETS OF
RULES, VERY, VERY DIFFICULT FOR
US TO ADMINISTER, AND A LACK OF
ACCOUNTABILITY BECAUSE WE'RE A
FEDERAL BUREAUCRACY.
TRIBES WILL HOLD PEOPLE
ACCOUNTABLE FOR DOING THE RIGHT
JOB FOR THEIR KIDS AND THAT'S
THE BASIC PREMISE HERE.
>> WHAT MAKES YOU THINK THAT'S
GOING TO WORK.
>> WE HAVE SOME GREAT BRIGHT
SPOTS OUT THERE.
THE MISSISSIPPI BAND OF CHOCTAW
INDIANS HAS DONE A WONDERFUL JOB
OF TRIBAL CONTROL OF SCHOOLS.
THEY HIRE A DIRECTOR, REPORTS TO
THE TRIBAL COUNCIL AND THE
TRIBAL CHIEF, AND THEY HAVE
DIDN'T A GREAT JOB.
I VISITED THEIR RESERVATION AND
I SAW IT IN ACTION.
I HAVE BEEN TO MANY SCHOOLS
WHERE THE KIDS ARE WONDERFUL.
THE KIDS ARE CURIOUS.
THE KIDS DON'T KNOW HOW THE DECK
IS STACKED AGAINST THEM.
AND WE NEED TO NURTURE THAT.
I SEE INDIVIDUAL SCHOOLS WORKING
HARD TO DO THAT.
BUT I SEE THEM DOING IT IN
CRUMBLING FACILITIES, AND I SEE
THEM DOING THAT WITHOUT THE KIND
OF SUPPORT THAT THEY NEED FROM
US.
>> WE KNOW SOME NATIVE AMERICAN
LEADERS, THEY POINT TO THESE
YEARS OF PROMISE AS YOU MENTION,
THE KENNEDY ADMINISTRATION,
ABOUT CHILDREN GETTING A BETTER
EDUCATION.
THEY'RE SAYING MANY OF THOSE
PROMISES HAVE BEEN BROKEN.
I WAS READING TODAY A MINNESOTA
NEWSPAPER EDITORIAL WRITTEN ON
BEHALF OF AN INDIAN RESERVATION.
THEY SAY THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION HAS "IGNORED THE
FUNDAMENTAL NEED FOR SAFE,
FUNCTIONAL SCHOOLS."
>> SO THE IN MINNESOTA THEY'RE
IN THE MIDDLE OF A SERIES, WHICH
I WOULD SAY IS VERY HELPFUL,
BECAUSE IT'S SHINING A SPOTLIGHT
ON THE CHALLENGES WE HAVE OF THE
SCHOOLS THAT I ADMINISTER
THROUGH THE PURE REOF INDIAN
EDUCATION, IT'S ABOUT 183 OF
THEM, ONE-THIRD OF THEM ARE
CONSIDERED IN POOR CONDITION.
ONE OF THEM WAS A SCHOOL I
VISITED UP THERE.
NONE OF US WOULD WANT OUR KIDS
TO GO TOCHO SOL THERE.
IT'S NOT SAFE.
IT WASN'T DESIGNED FOR THAT
PURPOSE.
IT'S TOO COLD.
IT'S TOO HOT.
IT HAS NO LABS FOR SCIENCE.
IT'S NOT SERVE CHILDREN WELL.
SO WE NEED SUPPORT IN OUR BUDGET
TO BE ABLE TO DO THAT.
WE NEED TO GET CREATIVE, WHICH
I'M GETTING IN FIGURING OUT WHAT
OTHER SOURCES OF SUPPORT MIGHT
THERE BE.
IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR, IN THE
PHILANTHROPIC COMMUNITY, IN
STATES BUT ALSO STEPPING UP TO
OUR OBLIGATIONS AS A NATION AND
PUTTING MONEY IN THE BUDGET TO
TAKE CARE OF THESE SCHOOLS,
WHICH WE'RE OBLIGATED TO DO BUT
WE'RE NOT FUNDED TO DO.
>> WE KNOW IT'S A TOUGH SET OF
PROBLEMS.
I ALSO WANT TO ASK YOU ABOUT
ANOTHER PART OF YOUR PORTFOLIO.
ANOTHER TOUGH SET OF ISSUES.
THAT'S ENERGY.
WE KNOW BOTH THE OIL AND GAS
INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTALISTS
SEPARATELY ARE VERY ANXIOUSLY
AWAITING FINAL RULES ON
HYDRAULIC FRACTURING, FRACKING
ON PUBLIC LAND.
THE ENVIRONMENTALISTS SAY
THEY'RE WORRIED THIS IS GOING TO
DESTROY THE ENVIRONMENT, DO
TERRIBLE DAMAGE.
THE INDUSTRY IS SAYING, NO, IF
YOU DON'T DO FRACKING, YOU'RE
GOING TO COST ALL THESE JOBS.
HOW DO YOU STRIKE THE RIGHT
BALANCE HERE?
>> WELL, FIRST I'M AN
ENVIRONMENTALIST, AND I'M ALSO A
PETROLEUM ENGINEER.
I STARTED MY CAREER WORKING FOR
MOBILE OIL.
I HAVE PERSONALLY TRACKED WELLS
BEFORE.
SO FRACKING CAN BE DIDN'T SAFELY
AND RESPONSIBLY, BUT IT NEEDS TO
BE REGULATED IN A MODERN WAY
BECAUSE FRACKING HAS GONE A LONG
WAY SINCE I WAS IN THE INDUSTRY.
SO WE'RE MODERNIZING OUR
REGULATION, AND THERE ARE THREE
KEY THINGS THAT WE'RE LOOKING AT
IN REGULATIONS.
THE MOST IMPORTANT THING IS
INTEGRITY.
IF YOU'VE GOT A GOOD WELL
INTEGRITY AND THE THE FRACK
FLUID IS GOING WHERE IT'S
SUPPOSED TO GOSH, IT CAN UNLOCK
RESOURCES WITH A SMALL IMPRINT
ON THE LAND.
THAT WASN'T TRUE.
YOU DRILLED INDIVIDUAL WELLS
WITH SODA STRAWS.
NOW CRO YOU CAN DRILL
DIRECTIONALLY AND FRACK
HORIZONLY.
BUT YOU NEED TO KNOW WHAT'S
BEING PUT DOWN THE HOLE, YOU
NEED TO KNOW WHAT'S HAPPENING
WITH THE FLUIDS AS THEY COME
BACK.
THAT'S WHAT OUR REGULATIONS ARE
ADDRESSING.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE COMING
OUT IN THE NEXT FEW WEEKS WE
UNDERSTAND.
>> WE HAVEN'T SET A DALE
JARRETT, BUT WE HAVE TAKEN
COMMENTS TWICE, OVER A MILLION
COMMENTS.
WE'RE SYNTHESIZING THOSE.
WE HOPE TO HAVE THEM RELEASED IN
THE RELATIVELY NEAR FUTURE.
>> Woodruff: WHEN THEY DO COME
OUT, WE HOPE YOU COME BKAC AND
WE CAN TALK TO YOU.
>> THAT WOULD BE GREAT.
>> Woodruff: SECRETARY OF THE
INTERIOR, SALLY JEWELL, THANK
YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
A GRAND JURY IN NEW YORK
DECLINED TO INDICT A WHITE
POLICEMAN IN THE CHOKING DEATH
OF A BLACK MAN, ERIC GARNER.
MAYOR BILL DE BLASIO APPEALED
FOR CALM, AND A JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT OFFICIAL SAID THERE
WILL BE A SEPARATE, FEDERAL
INVESTIGATION.
JAPANESE AIR BAG MAKER TAKATA
REFUSED TO MAKE A RECALL OF
DEFECTIVE PRODUCTS NATIONWIDE IN
THE U.S.
AND THERE WAS WORD THIS EVENING
THAT A U.S. HEALTH CARE WORKER
WHO MAY HAVE BEEN EXPOSED TO
EBOLA IN WEST AFRICA IS BEING
TRANSFERRED TO EMORY UNIVERSITY
HOSPIL ITAN ATLANTA.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE RIGHT NOW, BRITISH
SCIENTISTS HAVE SOLVED A 500-
YEAR-OLD COLD CASE.
OVER THE CENTURIES, THE LOCATION
OF KING RICHARD THE THIRD'S
GRAVE WAS LOST.
IN 2012, HUMAN BONES WERE
UNEARTHED FROM UNDER A PARKING
LOT IN ENGLAND, AND NOW, USING
D.N.A., RESEARCHERS HAVE
CONCLUDED THAT THEY ARE THOSE OF
THE INFAMOUS MONARCH.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, pbs.org/newshour.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT A
LONG AWAITED REPORT BY THE
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ON SEXUAL
ASSAULT IN THE MILITARY.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINEND A AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING, FOR ALL
OF US HERE AT THE PBS NEWSHOUR,
THANK YOU AND GOOD NIGHT.